are you uncomfortable talking about this
yeah I mean it's pretty wild right
Mustafa suan the billionaire founder of
Google's AI technology he's played a key
role in the development of AI from its
first critical steps in 2020 I moved to
work on Google's chat box it was the
ultimate technology we can use them to
turbocharge our knowledge unlike
anything else why didn't they release it
we were nervous we were nervous every
organization is going to race to get
their hands on intelligence and that's
going to be incredibly destructive this
technology can be used to identify
cancerous tumors as it can to identify a
Target on the battlefield a tiny group
of people who wish to cause harm are
going to have access to tools that can
instantly destabilize our world that's
the challenge how to stop something that
can cause harm or potentially kill
that's where we need containment do you
think that it is containable it has to
be possible why it must be possible why
must it be because otherwise it contains
us yet you chose to build a company in
this space why did you do that because I
want to design an AI that on your side I
honestly think that if we succeed
everything is a lot cheaper it's going
to power New forms of transportation
reduce the cost of healthcare but what
if we fail the really painful answer to
that question is
that do you ever get sad about
it yeah it's intense
I think this is fascinating I looked at
the back end of our YouTube channel and
it says that since this channel started
69.9% of you that watch it frequently
haven't yet hit the Subscribe button so
I have a favor to ask you if you've ever
watched this Channel and enjoyed the
content if you're enjoying this episode
right now please could I ask a small
favor please hit the Subscribe button
helps this channel more than I can
explain and I promise if you do that to
return the favor we will make the show
better and better and better and better
and better that's the promise I'm
willing to make you if you hit the
Subscribe button do we have a
[Music]
deal everything that's going on with
artificial intelligence now and um this
new wave and all these terms like AGI
and saw another term in your your book
called ACI first time I'd heard that
term how do you feel about it
emotionally if you had to incapsulate
how you feel emotionally about what's
going on in this moment how would you do
what words would you use I would say
say in the past it would have been
petrified and I think that over
time as you really think through the
consequences and the pros and cons and
the trajectory that we're on you adapt
and you understand that actually there
is
something incredibly inevitable about
this trajectory and that we have to wrap
our arms around it and guide it and
control it as a collective species as a
as humanity and I think the more you
realize how much influence we
collectively can have over this outcome
the more empowering it is because on the
face of it this is really going to be
the tool that helps us tackle all the
challenges that we're facing as a
species right we need to fix water
desalination we need to grow food 100x
cheaper than we currently do we need
renewable energy to be you know
ubiquitous and everywhere in our lives
we need to adapt to climate change
everywhere you look in the next 50 years
we have to do more with less and there
are very very
few proposals let alone practical
solutions for how we get there training
machines to help us as AIDS scientific
research Partners inventors creators is
absolutely essential and so the upside
is phenomenal it's enormous but AI isn't
just a thing it's not an inevitable
whole its form isn't inevitable right
its form the exact way that it manifests
and appears in our everyday lives and
the way that it's governed and who it's
owned by and how it's trained that is a
question that is up to us collectively
as a species to figure out over the next
decade because if we don't Embrace that
challenge then it happens to us and
that's really what I'm I have been
wrestling with for 15 years of my career
is how to intervene in a way that this
really does benefit everybody and those
benefits far far outweigh the potential
risks at what stage were you
petrified so I founded Deep Mind in
2010 and you know over the course of the
first few years our progress was fairly
modest but quite quickly in sort of 2013
as the Deep learning Revolution began to
take off I could see
glimmers of very early versions of AIS
learning to do really clever things so
for example one of our big initial
achievements was to Teach an AI to play
the Atari games so remember Space
Invaders and and pong where you batter a
ball from left to right and we trained
this initial AI to purely look at the
raw pixels screen by screen flickering
or moving in front of the AI and then
control the actions up down left right
shoot or not and it got so good at
learning to play this simple game simply
through attaching a value between the
reward like it was it was getting score
and taking an action that it learned
some really clever strategies uh to play
the game really well that Us games
players and humans hadn't really even
noticed at least people in the office
hadn't noticed it some professionals did
um and that was amazing to me because I
was like wow this simple system that
learns through a set of stimuli Plus a
reward to take some actions can actually
discover many strategies clever tricks
to play the game well that us humans
hadn't occurred to us right and that to
me is both thrilling because it presents
the opportunity to invent new knowledge
and Advance our
civilization but of course in the same
measure is also petrifying
was there a particular moment when you
were you were at Deep Mind where you go
where you had that kind of Eureka Moment
Like a day when something happened and
and it caused
that that Epiphany I guess was it yeah
it it it was actually a moment even
before 2013 where I remember standing in
the office and watching a very early
prototype of one of these image
recognition image generation models that
had um was trained to generate new
handwritten black and white digits so
imagine 0er to 1 2 3 4 5 6 789 all in
different style of handwriting on a tiny
grid of like 300 pixels by 300 pixels in
black and white and we were trying to
train the AI to generate a new version
of one of those digits a number seven in
a new handwriting sounds so simplistic
today given the incredible
photorealistic images that are being
generated right um and I just remember
so clearly it it took sort of 10 or 15
seconds and it just resolved it the the
number appeared it went from complete
Black to like slowly gray and then
suddenly these were like white pixels
appeared out of the the black darkness
and it revealed a number seven and that
sounds so simplistic in hindsight but it
was amazing I was like wow the model
kind of understands the representation
of a seven well enough to generate a new
example of a number seven an image of a
number seven you know and you roll
forward 10 years and our predictions
were correct in fact it was quite
predictable in hindsight the trajectory
that we were on more compute plus vast
amounts of data has enabled us within a
decade to go from predicting black and
white digits generating new versions of
those images to now generating
unbelievable
photorealistic not just images but
videos novel videos with a simple
natural language instruction or a prompt
what has surprised you you said you
referred to that as predictable but what
has surprised you about what's happened
over the last decade
so I think what was predictable to me
back then was the generation of images
and of audio um because the structure of
an image is locally contained so pixels
that are near one another create
straight lines and edges and corners and
then eventually they create eyebrows and
noses and eyes and faces and entire
scenes and I could just intuitively in a
very simplistic way I could get my head
around the fact that okay well we're
predicting these number sevens you can
imagine how you then can expand that out
to enre images maybe even to videos
maybe you know to audio too you know
what I said you know a couple seconds
ago is connected in phon space in the
spectrogram but what was much more
surprising to me was that those same
methods for Generation applied in the
space of language you know language
seems like such a different abstract
space of ideas when I say like the cat
sat on the
most people would probably predict Matt
right but it could be table car chair
tree it could be Mountain Cloud I mean
there's a gazillion possible next word
predictions and so the space is so much
larger the ideas are so much more
abstract I just couldn't wrap my
intuition around the idea that we would
be able to create the incredible large
language models that you see today
your chat
gpts chat GPT Google B the Google's Bard
inflection my new company has an AI
called Pi pi. a which stands for
personal intelligence and it's as good
as chat GPT but much more emotional and
empathetic and kind so it's just super
surprising to me that just growing the
size of these large language models as
we have done by 10x every single year
for the last 10 years we've been able to
produce this and that that that's just
an amazingly large number if you just
kind of pause for a moment to Grapple
with the numbers here in 2013 when we
trained the Atari AI that I mentioned to
you at Deep Mind that used two Peta
flops of computation so peta
peta stands for a million billion
calculations a flop is a calculation so
2 million
billion right which is already an insane
number of calculations lost me at two
it's totally crazy yeah just two of
these units that are already really
large and every year since then we've
10x the number of calculations that can
be done such that today the biggest
language model that we train at
inflection uses 10 billion Peta flops so
10 billion million billion calculations
I mean it's just unfathomably large
number and what we've really observed is
that scaling these models by 10x every
single year produces this magical
experience of talking to an AI that
feels like you're talking to a human
that is super knowledgeable and super
smart there's so much that's happened in
public conversation around AI um and
there's so many questions that I have
I've I've been speaking to a few people
about artificial intelligence and
understand it and I'm I think where I am
right now is I feel quite
scared um but when I get scared I don't
get it's not the type of scared that
makes me anxious it's not like an
emotional scared it's a very logical
scared it's my very logical brain hasn't
been able to figure out how the
inevitable outcome that I've arrived at
which is that humans become the less
dominant species on this planet um how
that is to be avoided in any way the
first chapter of your book The Coming
way wave is a is is a is titled
appropriately to how I feel containment
is not possible you you say in that
chapter the widespread emotional
reaction I I was observing is something
I've come to call the pessimism aversion
trap correct what is the pessimism
aversion trap
well so all of us being included feel
what you just described when you first
get to grips with the idea of this new
new coming wave it's scary it's
petrifying it's threatening is it going
to take my job is my daughter or son
going to fall in love with it you know
what does this mean what does it mean to
be human in a world where there's these
other humanlike things that aren't human
how do I make sense of that it's super
scary and a lot of people over the last
few years I think things have changed in
the last six months I have to say but o
over the last few years I would say
the default reaction has been to avoid
the pessimism and the fear right to just
kind of recoil from it and pretend that
it's like either not happening or that
it's all going to work out to be Rosy
it's going to be fine we don't have to
worry about it people often say well
we've always created new jobs we've
never permanently displaced jobs we've
only ever seen new jobs be created
unemployment is at an all-time low right
so there's this default optimism bias
that we have and I think it's less about
a need for optimism and more about a
fear of P pessimism and so that trap
particularly in Elite circles means that
often we aren't having the tough
conversations that we need to have in
order to respond to the coming
wave are you scared in part about having
those tough conversations because of how
it might be received um not so much
anymore so I've spent most of my career
trying to put those tough questions on
the policy table right I've been raising
these questions the ethics of AI safety
and questions of containment for as long
as I can remember with governments and
civil societies and all the rest of it
and so I've become used to talking about
that and you know I
think it's essential that we have the
honest conversation because we can't let
let it happen to us we have to openly
talk about
it is I mean this is a this is a big a
big question
but as you sit here now do you think
that it is containable because
I I I can't see
how I can't see how it can be
contained chapter 3 is the containment
problem or you give give the example of
how Technologies are often invented for
good reasons and for certain use cases
like the hammer you know which is used
you know maybe to build something but it
also can be used to kill people
um and you say in history we haven't
been able to ban a technology ever
really it has always found a way into
society um because of other societies
have an incentive to have it even if we
don't and then we need we need it like
the nuclear bomb because if they have it
then we don't then we're at a
disadvantage so are you optimistic
honestly I don't think an optimism or a
pessimism frame is the right one because
the E both are equally biased in ways
that I think distract us as I say in the
book on the face of it it does look like
containment isn't possible we haven't
contained or permanently banned a
technology of this type in the past
there are some that we have done right
so we banned cfc's for example because
they were producing a hole in the ozone
layer we've banned certain weapons
chemical and biological weapons for
example or blinding lasers Believe It or
Not There are such things as lasers that
will instantly blind you you know so we
have stepped back from the frontier in
some cases but that's largely where
there's either cheaper or you know
equally effective Alternatives that are
quickly adopted in this case
these Technologies are Omni use so the
same core technology can be used to
identify you know cancerous tumors in
chest x-rays as it can to identify a
Target on the battlefield for an aerial
strike so that mixed use or Omni use is
going to drive the proliferation because
there's huge commercial incentives
because it's going to deliver a huge
benefit and do a lot of good and that's
the challenge that we have to figure out
is how to stop something which on the
face of it is so good but at the same
time can be used in really bad ways too
do you think we will I do think we will
so I think that nation states Remain the
backbone of our civilization we have
chosen to concentrate power in a single
Authority the nation state and we pay
our tax is and we've given the nation
state a monopoly over the use of
violence and now the nation state is
going to have
to update itself quickly to be able to
contain this technology because without
that kind of essentially oversight both
of those of us who are making it but
also crucially of the open
source then it will proliferate and it
will spread but regulation is still a
real tool and we we can use it and we
must what does what does the world look
like in um let's say 30 years if that
doesn't happen in your
view people because people the average
person can't really gra grapple their
head around artificial intelligence when
they think of it they think of like
these large Lang large language models
that you can chat to and ask it about
your
homework that's like the average
person's understanding of artificial
intelligence because that's all they've
ever been exposed to of it you have a
different view because of the work
you've spent the last decade doing so to
try and give Dave who's I don't know an
Uber driver in Birmingham an idea who's
listening to this right now what
artificial intelligence intelligence is
and its potential capabilities if you
know there's no there's no containment
what does it what does the world look
like in 30
years so I think it's going to feel
largely like another human so think
about the things that you can do not
again in the physical world but in the
digital world 2050 I'm thinking of I'm
in
2050 2050 we will have robots 2050 we
will definitely have robots I mean more
than that 2050 we will have new
biological beings as well because the
same trajectory that we've been on with
hardware and software is also going to
apply to the platform of biology are you
uncomfortable talking about this yeah I
mean it's pretty wild right don't know
you crossed your arms
and no I always I always look I always I
always use that as as a cue for someone
when when a subject matter is
uncomfortable and it's interesting
because I know you know so much more
than me and about this and I know youve
spent way more hours thinking off into
the future about the consequences of
this I mean you've written a book about
it so P like you spent 10 years at the
very deep mind is one of the the
Pinnacle companies the Pioneers in this
whole Space so you know you know some
stuff and it's funny because when I was
I watched an interview with Elon Musk
and he was asked a question similar to
this I know he speaks in certain certain
tone of voice but he said that he he's
almost he's gotten to the point where he
thinks he's living in suspended
disbelief where he thinks that if he
spent too long thinking about it he
wouldn't understand the purpose of what
he's doing right now and he he says that
it's more dangerous than nuclear weapons
um and that it's too late too late to
stop it there this's one interview
that's chilling and I was filming
Dragons Den the other day and I showed
the dragons the clip I was said look
what El musk said when he was asked
about what his child what advice he
should give to his children in a world
of in an an inevitable world of
artificial intelligence it's the first
time I've seen Elon Musk stop for like
20 seconds and not know what to say
stumble stumble stumble stumble
stumble and then conclude that he's
living in suspended
disbelief yeah I mean I think it's a
great phrase that is the moment we're in
we have to it's what I said to you about
the pessimism verion trap and we have to
confront the probab ility of seriously
dark outcomes and we have to spend time
really thinking about those consequences
because the competitive nature of
companies and of nation states is going
to mean that every organization is going
to race to get their hands on
intelligence intelligence is going to be
a new form of of capital right just as
there was a grab for land or there's a
grab for oil there's a grab for anything
that enables you to do more with less
faster better smarter right and we can
clearly see the predictable trajectory
of the exponential improvements in these
Technologies and so we should expect
that wherever there is power there's now
a new tool to amplify that power
accelerate that power turbocharge it
right and you know in 2050 if you ask me
to look out there I mean of of course it
makes me Grimace that's why I was like
oh my God
it's it really does feel like a new
species and and that has to be brought
under control we cannot allow ourselves
to be dislodged from our position as the
dominant species on this planet we
cannot allow that you mentioned robots
so these are sort of adjacent
technologies that Rising with artificial
intelligence robots you mentioned um
biological new biological
species give me some light on what you
mean by
that well so so far the dream of
Robotics hasn't really come to fruition
right I mean we we still have the most
we have now are sort of drones and
little bit of self-driving
cars but that is broadly on the same
trajectory as these other Technologies
and I think that over for the next 30
Years you know we are going to have
humanoid robotics we're going to have um
you know
physical tools within our everyday
system that we can rely on that will be
pretty good that would be pretty good to
do many of the physical tasks and that's
a little bit further out because I think
it you know there's a lot of tough
problems there but it's still coming in
the same way and likewise with Biology
you know we can now see sequence a
genome for a millionth of the cost of
the first genome which took place in
2000 so 20ish years ago the cost has
come down by a million times and we can
now increasingly synthesize that is
create or
manufacture new bits of DNA which
obviously give rise to life in every
possible form and we're starting to
engineer that DNA to either remove
traits
uh or capabilities that we don't like or
indeed to add new things that we want it
to do we want you know fruit to last
longer or we want meat to have higher
protein etc etc synthetic meat to have
higher protein
levels and what's the implications of
that potential
implications I think the the darkest
scenario there is that people will
experiment with pathogens
engineered you know synthetic pathogens
that might end up accidentally or
intentionally being more
transmissible I.E they they can spread
faster um or more lethal I.E you know
they cause more harm or potentially kill
like a pandemic like a pandemic um
and that's where we need containment
right we have to limit access to the
tool TOs and the knowhow to carry out
that kind of experimentation so one
framework of thinking about this with
respect to making containment possible
is that we really are experimenting with
dangerous
materials and Anthrax is not something
that can be bought over the Internet
that can be freely experimented with and
likewise the very best of these tools in
a few years time are going to be capable
of creating you know new synthetic um
pandemic pathogens and so we have to
restrict access to those things that
means restricting access to the compute
it means restricting access to the
software that runs the models to the
cloud environments that provide apis
provide you access to experiment with
those things um and of course on the
biology side it means restricting access
to some of the substances and people
aren't going to like this people are not
going to like that claim because it
means that those who want to do good
with those tools those who want to
create a start up the small guy the
little developer that struggles to
comply with all the regulations they're
going to be pissed off understandably
right but that is the age we're in deal
with it like we have to confront that
reality that means that we have to
approach this with the precautionary
principle right never before in the
invention of a technology or in the
creation of a regulation have we
proactively said we need to go slowly we
need to make sure that this first does
no harm the precautionary principle and
that is just an unprecedented moment no
other Technology's done that right
because I think we collectively in the
industry those of us who are closest to
the work can see a place in 5 years or
10 years where it could get out of
control and we have to get on top of it
now now and it's better to forgo like
that is give up some of those potential
upsides or benefits until we can be more
sure that it can be contained that it
can be controlled that it always serves
our Collective interests and I I think
about that so I think about what you've
just said there about being able to
create these pathogens these diseases
and viruses Etc that you know could
become weapons or whatever else but with
artificial intelligence and the power of
that intelligence with these um
pathogens you could theoretically ask
one of these systems to create a virus
that a very deadly
virus um you could ask the artificial
intelligence to create a very deadly
virus that has certain
properties um maybe even that mutates
over time in a certain way so it only
kills a certain amount of people kind of
like a nuclear bomb of of viruses that
you could just pop hit an enemy with now
if I'm if I hear that and I go okay
that's powerful I would like one of
those you know there might be an
adversary out there that goes I would
like one of those just in case America
get out of hand and America's thinking
you know I want one of those in case
Russia gets out of hand and so okay you
might take a precautionary approach in
the United States but that's only going
to put you on the back foot when China
or Russia or one of your adversaries
accelerates forward in that in that path
and this was the same with the the
nuclear bomb and you know you nailed it
I mean that is is the race condition we
refer to that as the race condition the
idea that if I don't do it the other
party is going to do it and therefore I
must do it but the problem with that is
that it creates a self-fulfilling
prophecy so the default there is that we
all end up doing it and that can't be
right because there is a opportunity for
massive cooperation here there's a
shared that is between us and China and
every other quote unquote them or they
or enemy that we want to create we've
all got a shared interest in advancing
the collective health and well-being of
humans and Humanity how well have we
done at promoting shared interest well
in the development of Technologies over
the years even at like a corporate level
even you
know you know the nuclear
nonproliferation treaty has been
reasonably successful there's only nine
nuclear states in the world today we've
stopped many like three countries
actually gave up nuclear weapons because
we incentivize them with sanctions and
threats and economic rewards um small
groups have tried to get access to
nuclear weapons and so far have largely
failed it's expensive though right and
hard to like uranium as a as a chemical
to keep it stable and to to buy it and
to house it I mean I couldn't just put
it in the shed you certainly couldn't
put it in a shed you can't download
uranium 235 off the Internet it's not
available open source that is totally
true so it's got different
characteristics for sure but a kid in
Russia could you know in his bedroom
could download something onto his
computer that's incredibly harmful in
the artificial intelligence Department
right I think that that will be possible
at some point in the next five years
it's true because there's a weird Trend
that's going on here on the one hand
You've Got The Cutting Edge AI models
that are built by Google and open Ai and
my company inflection and they cost
hundreds of millions of dollars and
there's only a few of them but on the
other hand the what was cutting edge a
few years ago is now open source today
so gpt3 which came out in the summer of
2020 is now reproduced as an open-
Source model so the code and the weights
of the model the design of the model and
the actual implementation code is
completely freely available on the web
and it's tiny it's like 60 times or 60
70 times smaller than the original model
which means that it's cheaper to use and
cheaper to run and that's as you know
we've said earlier like that's the
natural trajectory of technologies that
become useful they get more efficient
they get cheaper and they spread further
and so that's the containment challenge
that's really the essence of what I'm
sort of trying to raise in my book is to
frame the challenge of the next 30 to 50
years as around containment um and
around confronting
proliferation do you believe because
we're both going to be alive unless this
you know there some robot kills us but
we're both going to be alive in 30 years
time I hope so maybe the podcast will
still be going unless AI is now taking
my
job it's very possible so I'm I'm going
to sit you here and you know when you're
you you'll be what 60 68 years old I'll
be
60 um and I'll
say at that point when we have that
conversation do you think we would have
been successful in containment at a
global level I think we have to be I
can't even think that we're not why
because I'm fundamentally a humanist and
I think that we have to make a choice to
put our species first
and I think that that's what we have to
be defending for the next 50 years
that's what we have to defend because
look it it's it's certainly possible
that we invent these
agis in such a way that they are always
going to be
provably um
subservient uh to humans and take
instructions you know from their human
controller every single time but enough
of us think that we can't be sure about
that that I don't think we should take
the gamble basically
so that's why I think that we should
focus on containment and non
proliferation because some people if
they do have access of the technology
will want to take those risks and they
will just want to see like what's on the
other side of the door you know and they
might end up opening Pandora's Box and
that's a decision that affects all of us
and that's the challenge of the
networked age you know we live in this
globalized world and we use these words
like globalization and we you sort of
forget what globalization means this is
what globalization is this is what a
networked world is it means that someone
taking one small action can suddenly
spread
everywhere instantly regardless of their
intentions when they took the action it
maybe you know unintentional like you
say may be that they're never they
weren't ever meaning to do
harm well I think I asked you when I
said it you 30 years time you said that
there will be like human level
intelligence you'll be interacting with
you know this new species but the
species for me to think the the species
will want to interact with me is feels
like wishful thinking because what will
I be to them you know like I've got a
French Bulldog Pablo and I can't imagine
our IQ is that far apart like like you
know in relative terms my the IQ between
me and my dog Pablo I can't imagine
that's that far apart even when I think
about is it like the orangutang where we
only have like 1% difference in DNA or
something crazy and yet they throw their
poop around and I'm sat here
broadcasting around the world there's
quite a difference in that 1% you know
and then I think about this new species
where as you write in your book in
chapter
4 there seems to be no upper limit to
ai's potential
intelligence why would such an
intelligence want to interact with me
well it depends how you design it
so I think that our goal one of the
challenges of containment is to design
AIS that we want to interact with that
want to interact with us right if you
set an objective function for an AI a
goal for an AI by its design which you
know inherently disregards or
disrespects you as a human and your
goals then it's going to wander off and
do a lot of strange things what if it
has kids and the kids are you know what
I mean what if it replicates in a way
where because because I've I've heard
this this conversation around like it
depends how we design it but you
know I think about
it's kind of like if I have a kid and
the kid grows up to be a thousand times
more intelligent than me to think that I
could have any influence on it on it
when it's a thinking
sentient
developing species again feels like I'm
overestimating my version of
intelligence and importance and
significance in the face of something
that is incomprehensibly like a even a
hundred times more intelligent than me
and the speed of its computation is a
thousand times what my
the meat in my skull can do yeah like
how how how is it gonna how how do I
know it's going to respect me or care
about me or understand you know that I
me you
know I think that comes back down to the
containment challenge I think that if we
can't be confident that it's going to
respect you and understand you and work
for you and us as a species overall then
that's where we have to adopt the
precautionary principle I don't think we
should be taking those kinds of risks in
experimentation and design and now I'm
not saying it's possible to design an AI
that doesn't have those self-improvement
capabilities in the limit in like 30 or
50 years I think it you know that's kind
of what I was saying is like it seems
likely that if you have one like that
it's going to take advantage of infinite
amounts of data and infinite amounts of
computation and it's going to kind of
outstrip our ability to act and so I
think we have to step back from that
precipice that's what the containment
problem is is that it's it's actually
saying no sometimes it's saying no and
that's a different sort of muscle that
we've never really exercised as a
civilization and and that's obviously
why containment appears not to be
possible because we've never done it
before we've never done it before and
every inch of our you know Comm and
politics and our war and all of our
instincts are just like Clash compete
Clash compete prophit profit grow beat
exactly dominate you know fear them be
paranoid like now all this nonsense
about like China being this new evil
like it how does that slip into our
culture how are we suddenly all shifted
from thinking it's the the the Muslim
terrorists about to blow us all up to
now it's the Chinese who are about to
you know blow up Kansas it's just like
what are we talking about that like we
really have to pair back the paranoia
and the fear and the othering um because
those are the incentive dynamics that
are going to drive us to you know cause
self harm to humanity thinking the worst
in each other the the there's couple of
key moments when in my understanding of
artificial intelligence that have been
kind of Paradigm Paradigm shifts for me
because I think like many people I
thought of artificial intelligence
as you know like a like a child I was
Raising and I would program I would code
it to do certain things so I would code
it to play chess and I would tell it the
moves that are conducive with being
successful in chess and then I remember
watching that like Alpha go documentary
right which I think was deep deep mind
wasn't it that was us yeah you guys so
you programmed this this um artificial
intelligence to play the game go which
is kind of like just think of it kind of
like a chess or a black am or whatever
and it eventually just beats the best
player in the world of all time and it
and the way it learned how to beat the
best player in the world of all time the
world champion who was by the way
depressed when he got beat um was just
by playing itself right and then there's
this moment I think in is it game four
or something where right it does this
move that no one could have predicted a
move that seemingly makes absolutely no
sense
right in those moments where no one
trained it to do that and it did
something unexpected Beyond where humans
are trying to figure it out in hindsight
this is where I go how do you how do you
train it if it's doing things we didn't
anticipate right like how do you control
it when it's doing things that humans
couldn't anticipate it doing where we're
looking at that move it's called like
move 37 or something correct yeah is it
move 37 it is look at my intelligence F
nice work yeah I'm I'm going to survive
a bit longer than I thought it's like
move 37 you at least another decade in
you um move 37 does this crazy thing and
you see everybody like lean in and go
why has it done that and it turns out to
be brilliant that humans couldn't
couldn't forecast the commentator
actually thought it was a mistake yeah
he was a pro and he was like this this
definitely a mistake you know it's the
the alpha go lost the game but it was so
far ahead of us that it knew something
we didn't right right that's when that's
when I lost hope in this whole idea of
like oh train it to do what we want like
a dog like sit pour roll over right well
the real challenge is that we actually
want it to do those things like when it
discovers a new strategy
or it invents a new idea or it helps us
find like you know a cure for some
disease like that's why we're building
it right because we're reaching the
limits of what we as you know humans can
invent and solve right especially with
what we're facing of you know in terms
of population growth over the next 30
Years and how climate change is going to
affect that and so on like we really
want these tools to turbocharge us right
and yet like it's that creativity and
that invention which obviously makes us
also
feel well maybe it it is really going to
do things that we don't like for sure
right so
interesting how do you contend with all
of this how do you contend with the the
clearup side and then you must like Elon
must be completely aware of the the
horrifying existential risk at the same
time and and you're building a big
company in this space which I think is
valued at 4 billion now inflection AI
which has got this its own model called
Pi so you're building in this space you
understand the incentives at both a
nation state level and a corporate level
that we're we're going to keep planing
forward even if the US stops there's
going to be some other country that sees
that as a huge Advantage their economy
will swell because they did if this
company stops then this one's going to
get a get a huge advantage and their
shareholders are you know
everyone's investing in AI full steam
ahead but you feel you can see this huge
existential risk is it suspended is that
the pathw suspended
disbelief I mean just to kind of like
just know that it's I feel like I know
that it's going to happen no one's been
able to tell me
otherwise but just don't think too much
about it and you'll be okay I think you
can't give up right I think that in some
ways you're realization exactly what
you've just described like weighing up
two conflicting and horrible truths
about what is likely to happen those
contradictions that is a kind of honesty
and a wisdom I think that we need all
collectively to realize because the only
path through this is to be straight up
and embrace you know the risks and
embrace the default trajectory of all
these competing incentives driving
forward to kind of make this feel like
inevitable and if you put the blinkers
on and you kind of just ignore it or if
you just be super Rosy and it's all
going to be all right and if you say
that we've always figured it out anyway
then you we're not going to get the
energy and the dynamism and engagement
from everybody to try to figure this out
and that's what gives me like reason to
be hopeful because I think that we make
progress by getting everybody paying
attention to this it isn't going to be
about those who are currently the AI
scientists or those who are the
technologists you know like me or the
Venture capitalists or just the
politicians like all of those people no
one's got answers so that's what we have
to confront there are no obvious answers
to this profound question and I've
basically written the book to say prove
that I'm wrong you know containment must
be
possible and I it must be it must be
possible it has to be possible it has to
be you want it to be I I desperately
want it to be yeah why must it be
because otherwise I think you're in the
camp of believing that this is the
inevitable evolution of humans the
transhuman kind of view you know some
people would argue like what is okay
let's part let's let's stretch the
timelines out okay so let's not talk
about 30 years let's talk about 200
years like what is this going to look
like in
2200 you tell me you're smarter than
me I mean it's mindblowing it's
mind-blowing we'll have quantum
computers by then what's a quantum
computer a quantum computer is a
completely different type of computing
architecture which in simple
terms basically allows you
to those those calculations that I
described at the beginning billions and
billions of flops those billions of
flops can be done in a single
computation so everything that you see
in the digital world today relies on
computers processing information and and
the speed of that processing is a
friction it kind of slows things down
right you remember back in the day old
School modems 56k modem the dialup sound
and the image pixel loading like pixel
by pixel that was because the computers
were slow and we're getting to a point
now where the computers are getting
faster and faster and faster and Quantum
Computing is like a whole new leap like
way way way Beyond where we where we
currently are and so by analogy how
would I understand that so like if my
I've got my dialup modem over here and
then Quantum Computing over here
right what's the how do I what's the
difference well I don't know what it's
really difficult to exp a billion times
faster oh it's it's it's like it's like
billions of billions times faster it's
it's it's much more than that I mean one
way of think about it is
like a floppy disc which I guess most
people remember 1.4 megabytes a physical
thing back in the day in
1960 or so that was basically an entire
pallets worth of computer that was moved
around by a forklift truck right which
is insane today you know you have
billions and billions of times that
floppy disc in your smartphone in your
pocket tomorrow you're going to have
billions and billions of smartphones in
minuscule wearable devices there'll be
cheap fridge magnets that you know are
constantly on everywhere sensing all the
time monitoring processing analyzing
improving
optimizing you know and they'll be super
cheap so it's super unclear what do you
do with all of that knowledge and
information I mean it's ultimately
knowledge creates value when you know
the relationship between things you can
improve them you know make it more
efficient and so more data is what has
enabled us to build all the value of you
know online in the last 25 years and so
what does that look like in 150 years I
can't really even imagine to be honest
with you it's very hard to say I don't
think everybody is going to be
working why would we yeah what we
wouldn't be working in that kind of
environment I mean look the other
trajectory to add to this is the cost of
energy
production you know AI if it really
helps us
solve battery
storage which is the missing piece I
think to really tackle climate change
then we will be able to Source basically
source and store infinite energy from
the Sun and I think in 20 or so years
time 20 30 years time that is going to
be a cheap and widely available if not
completely freely available resource and
if you think about it everything in
life has the cost of energy built into
its production value and so if you strip
that out everything is likely to get a
lot cheaper we'll be able to desalinate
water we'll be able to grow crops much
much cheaper we'll be able to grow much
higher quality food right it's going to
power New forms of transportation it's
going to reduce the cost of drug
production and Healthcare right so all
of those gains
obviously there'll be a huge commercial
incentive to drive the production of
those gains but the cost of producing
them is going to go through the floor I
think that's one key thing that a lot of
people don't realize that is a reason to
be hugely hopeful and optimistic about
the future everything is going to get
radically cheaper in 30 to 50
years it's a 200 years time we have no
idea what the world looks like it's uh
this goes back to the point about being
is it did you say transhumanist
right what does that
mean
transhumanism I mean it's a group of
people
who basically believe
that you that that humans and our soul
and our being will one day transcend or
move beyond our biological substrate
okay so our physical body our brain our
biology is just an enabler for your
intelligence and who you are as a person
and there's a group of kind of crack
Bots basically I think who think that
we're going to be able to upload
ourselves to a silicon substrate right a
computer that can hold the essence of
what it means to be Stephen so you in
200 in 20 uh in in
2200 will could well still be You by
their reasoning
but you'll live on a server somewhere
why are they wrong I think about all
these adjacent Technologies like
biological um biological advancements
did you call it like biosynthesis or
something was yeah synthetic biology syn
synthetic biology um I think about the
nanotechnology development right think
about Quantum Computing the the progress
in artificial intelligence everything
becoming cheaper and I think why why are
they
wrong it's hard to say precisely
but broadly speaking I haven't seen any
evidence yet that we're able to extract
the essence of a being from a brain
right it's that that that that kind of
dualism that you know there is a mind
and a body and a spirit that is a I I
don't think I don't see much evidence
for that even in Neuroscience um that
actually it's much more one and the same
so I don't think you know you're going
to be able to emulate the entire brain
so their thesis is that well some of
them cryogenically store their brain
after death Jesus so they they have it
they' they they wear these like you know
how you have like an organ donor tag or
whatever so they have a cryogenically
freeze me when I die tag and so they
there's like a special like ambulance
services that will come pick you up
because obviously you need to do it
really quickly the moment you die you
need to get put into a cryogenic freezer
to preserve your you know brain forever
I personally think this is this is is
nuts but you know their belief is that
you'll then be able to reboot that
biological brain and then transfer you
over
um it it doesn't seem plausible to me
when you said at the start of this this
little topic here that you it must be
possible to contain it said it must be
possible um the the reason why I I
struggle with that is because in chapter
7 you say line in your book that AI is
more autonomous than any other
technology in
history for centuries the idea that
technology is is somehow running out of
control a self-directed and
self-propelling force beyond the Realms
of human agency remained a fiction not
anym and this idea of autonomous
technology that
is acting
uninstructed um and is intelligent and
then you say we must be able to contain
it it's kind of like a massive dog like
a big rottweiler yeah
that is you know a thousand times bigger
than me and me looking up at it and
going I'm going to get take you for a
walk y yeah and then it's just looking
down at me and
just stepping over me or stepping on me
well that's actually a good example
because we have actually contained
Rottweilers before we've contained
gorillas and you know tigers and
crocodiles and pandemic pathogens and
nuclear weapons and so you know it's
easy to be you know a hater on what
we've achieved but this is the most
peaceful moment in the history of our
species this is a moment when our
biggest problem is that people eat too
much think about that we've spent our
entire evolutionary
period running around looking for food
and trying to stop you know our enemies
throwing rocks at us and we've had this
incredible period of 500 years
where you know each year things have
broadly well maybe each each Century
let's say there's been a few ups and
downs but things have broadly got better
and we're on a trajectory for you know
lifespans to increase and quality of
life to increase and health and
well-being to improve and I think that's
because in many ways we have succeeded
in containing forces that appear to be
more powerful than ourselves it just
requires unbelievable creativity and
adaptation it requires compromise and it
requires an a new tone right a much more
humble tone to governance and politics
and and how we run our world not this
kind of like hyper aggressive
adversarial paranoia tone that we talked
about previously but one that is like
much more wise than that much more
accepting that we are unleashing this
force that does have that that potential
to be the Rott riler that you described
but that we must contain that as our
number one priority that has to be the
thing that we focus on because otherwise
it contains
us i' I've been thinking a lot recently
about cyber security as well just
broadly on an individual level in a
world where there are these kinds of
tools which seems to be quite close um
large language models brings up this
whole new question about cyber security
and cyber safety and you know in a world
where there's these ability to generate
audio and language and videos that seem
to be real um what can we trust and you
know I was watching a video of a of a of
a young girl whose grandmother was
called up by a voice that was made to
sound like her son saying he'd been in a
car accident and asking for money and
her nearly sending the money or this
whole you know because this really
brings into Focus that we our lives are
build on built on trust trusting the
things we see here in
watch and in in and now we're at feels
like a a a moment where we're no longer
going to be able to trust what we see on
the internet on the
phone what what what advice do you do we
you have for people who were worried
about
this
so skepticism I think is healthy and
necessary and I think that we're going
to need it um even more than than we
ever did right and so if you think about
how we've adapted to the first wave of
this which was spammy email scams um
everybody got them and over
time people learned to identify them and
be skeptical of them and reject them
likewise you know I'm sure many of us
get like text messages I certainly get
loads of text messages trying to fish me
and ask me to meet up or do this that
and the other and we've adapted right
now I think we should all know and
expect that criminals will use these
tools to manipulate us just as you've
described I mean you know the voice is
going to be humanlike the Deep fake is
going to be super convincing and there
are actually ways around those things so
for example the reason why the banks
invented OTP um one-time passwords where
they send you a text message with a
special code um is precisely for this
reason so that you have a 2fa a two
Factor authentication increasingly we
will have a three or four Factor
authentication where you have to
triangulate between multiple separate
independent sources and it won't just be
like call your bank manager and release
the funds right
so this is where we need the creativity
and energy and attention of everybody
because
defense the kind of defensive measures
have to evolve as quickly as the
potential offensive measures the attacks
that are
coming I heard you say this that you
think um some people are for many of
these problems we're going to need to
develop AIS to defend us from the
AIS right we kind of already have that
right so we have automated ways of
detecting spam online these days you
know most of the time there are um
machine Learning Systems which are
trying to identify when your credit card
is used in a fraudulent way that's not a
human sitting there looking at patterns
of spending traffic in real time that's
an AI that is like flagging that
something looks off um likewise with
data centers or security cameras a lot
of those security cameras these days are
you know have tracking algorithms that
look for you know surprising sounds or
like if a if a glass window is is
smashed that'll be detected by an AI
often that is you know listening on the
security camera so you know that's kind
of what I mean by that is that
increasingly those AIS will get more
capable and we'll want to use them for
defensive purposes and that's exactly
what it looks like to have good healthy
well-functioning controlled AIS that
serve us I went on one of these large
language models and and said to me give
I said to the large language model give
me an example where in artificial
intelligence takes over the world or
whatever and just and results in the
destruction of humanity and then tell me
what we'd need to do to prevent
it and it said it gave me this wonderful
example of this AI called Cynthia that
threatens to destroy the world and it
says the way to defend that would be a
different AI which had a different name
and it said that this one would be
acting in human interests and we'd
basically be fighting one AI with
another Ai and of and of course of
course of course that level if Cynthia
started to wreak hav havoc on the world
and take control of the nuclear weapons
and infrastructure and all that we would
need an equally
intelligent weapon to fight
it although one of the interesting
things that we found um over the last
few decades is that it so far tended to
be the AI plus the human that has that
is still dominating that's the case in
chess uh in go and other games um
that in go it's still yeah so there was
a paper that came out a few months ago
two months ago that showed that a human
was actually able to beat The Cutting
Edge go program um even one that was
better than Alpha go with a new strategy
that they had discovered um you know so
obviously it's not just a sort of game
over environment where the AI just
arrives and it gets better like humans
also adapt they get super smart they
like I say get more cynical ask get more
more skeptical ask you know good
questions invent their own things use
their own AIS to adapt and that's the
evolutionary nature of what it means to
have a technology right I mean
everything is a technology like your
pair of glasses made you smarter in a
way like before there were glasses and
people got bad eyesight they weren't
able to read you know suddenly those who
did adopt those Technologies were able
to read for you know longer in their
lives or under low light conditions and
they were able to consume more
information and got smarter and so that
is the trajectory of Technology it's
this iterative interplay between you
know human and machine that makes us
better over time you know the potential
um consequences if if we don't reach a
point of containment yet you chose to
build a company in this space
yeah why why that why did you do that
because I believe that the best way to
uh demonstrate how to build safe and and
contained AI is to actually experiment
with it in practice and I think that if
we are just Skeptics or critics and we
stand back from The Cutting Edge then we
give up that opportunity to shape
outcomes to you know all of those other
actors that we referred to whether it's
like China and the US going at each
other's throats uh you know you know or
other big companies that are purely
pursuing profit at all costs and so it
doesn't solve all the problems of course
it's super hard and again it's full of
contradictions but I honestly think it's
the right way for everybody to proceed
you know if experiment at the front yeah
if you're afraid Russia Putin understand
right what reduces fear is deep
understanding spend time playing with
these models look at their weaknesses
they're not superhuman yet they make
tons of mistakes they're crappy in lots
of ways they're actually not that hard
to make the more you've experimented has
it has that correlated with a reduction
in
fear cheeky question no but that's yes
and no you're totally right yes it has
in the sense that you know the problem
is the more you learn the more you
realize yeah that's what I'm saying I
was fine before I started talking about
Ai and now more I've talked about
it it's true it's true it's it's sort of
pulling on a thread
which it's a crazy spiral um yeah I mean
like I think in the short term It's Made
Me way less afraid because I I don't see
that kind of existential harm that we've
been talking about in the next decade or
two but longer term that's that's where
I struggle to wrap my head around how
things play out in 30
years some people say
government regulation will sorted
out you discussed this in Chapter 13 of
your book where you which is titled
containment must be possible I love how
you didn't say is yeah containment must
be containment must be possible um what
do you say to people that say government
regulation will sorted out I had rishy
sunak did some announcement and he's got
a cobra committee coming together
they'll handle it that's right and the
EU have a huge piece of regulation
called the EU AI act um um you know Joe
President Joe Biden has you know gotten
his own you know set of proposals and um
you know we've been working with with
both you know Rishi sunak and and Biden
and you know trying to contribute and
shape it in the best way that we can
look it isn't going to happen without
regulation so regulation is essential is
critical um again going back to the
precautionary principle but at the same
time regulation isn't enough you know I
often hear people say well we'll just
regulate it we'll just stop we'll just
stop we'll just stop we'll slow down um
and the problem with that is that it
kind of ignores the fact that the people
who are putting together the regulation
don't really understand enough about the
detail today you know in their defense
they're rapidly trying to wrap their
head around it especially in in the last
6 months and that's a great relief to me
cuz I feel the burden is now
increasingly shared and you know just
from a personal perspective I'm like I
feel like I've been saying this for
about a decade and just in the last six
months now everyone's coming at me and
saying like you know what's going on I'm
like great this is the conversation we
need to be having because everybody can
start to see the glimmers of the future
like what will happen if a chat GPT like
product or a piie like product really
does improve over the next 10 years and
so when I say you know regulation is not
enough what I mean is it needs movement
it needs culture it needs people who are
actually building and making you know in
like modern creative critical ways not
just like giving it up to you know
companies or small groups of people
right we need lots of different people
experimenting with strategies for
containment isn't it predicted that this
industry is A1 15 trillion dollar
industry or something like that yeah
I've heard that it is a lot so if I'm
rishy and I know that I'm going to be
chucked out of office Rish is the prime
minister of the UK If I'm going to be
trucked out of office in two years
unless this economy gets good I don't
want to do anything to slow down that
$15 trillion dollar bag that I could be
on the receiving end of I would I would
definitely not want to slow that 15
billion trillion dollar bag and give it
to like America or Canada or some other
country I'd want that $15 trillion doll
windfall to be on my country right so I
have I have no other than the long-term
you know health and success of humanity
in my four-year election window I've got
to do everything I can to boost these
numbers right and get us looking good so
I I could give you lip
service but but but listen I'm not going
to be here unless these numbers look
good right exactly that's another one of
the problems short-termism is everywhere
who is responsible for thinking about
the 20-year
future who is it I mean that's a deep
question right I mean we we we the world
is happening to us on a decade by decade
time scale it's also happening hour by
hour so change is just ripping through
us and this arbitrary window of
governance of like a four-year election
cycle where actually it's not even four
years because by the time you've got in
you do some stuff for six months and
then by month you know 12 or 18 you're
starting to think about the next cycle
and are you going to pull you know this
just like the short-termism is killing
us right and we don't have an
Institutional body whose responsibility
is
stability you could think of it as like
a you
know like a global technology stability
function what is the global strategy for
containment that has the ability to to
introduce friction when necessary to
implement the precautionary principle
and to basically keep the
peace that I think is the missing
governance piece which we have to invent
in the next 20 years and it's insane
because I'm basically
describing the UN Security Council plus
the World Trade Organization all these
huge you know Global institutions which
formed after you know the horrors of the
second world war have actually been
incredible they've created
interdependence and alignment and
stability right obviously there's been a
lot of bumps along the way in the last
70 years but broadly speaking it's an
unprecedented period of peace and when
there's peace we can create prosperity
and that's actually what we're lacking
at the moment is that we don't have an
international mechanism for coordinating
among competing Nations competing
corporations um to drive the peace in
fact we're actually going kind of in the
opposite direction we're resorting to
the old school language of a clash of
civilizations with like China is the new
enemy they're going to come to dominate
us we have to dominate them it's a it's
a battle between two polls China's
taking over Africa China's taking over
the Middle East we have to count I mean
it's just like that can only lead to
conflict that just assumes that conflict
is inevitable and so when I say
regulation is not enough no amount of
good regulation in the UK or in Europe
or in the US is going to deal with that
Clash of civilizations language which we
seem to have been become addicted to if
we need that Global collaboration to be
successful here are you optimistic now
that we'll we'll get it because the same
incentives are at play with climate
change in AI you know why would I want
to reduce my carbon emissions when it's
making me loads of money or why you know
why would I want to reduce my AI
development when it's going to make us
15 trillion yeah so the the the really
painful answer to that question is that
we've only really ever driven extreme
compromise and consensus in two
scenarios one off the back of
unimaginable catastrophe and suffering
you know Hiroshima Nagasaki and the
Holocaust and World War II which drove
10 years of consensus and new political
structures right and then the second is
um we did fire the bullet though didn't
we we fired a couple of those nuclear
bombs exactly and that that's why I'm
saying the brutal truth of that is that
it takes a catastrophe to
trigger the need for alignment right so
that that's one the second is where
there is an obvious mutually assured
destruction um you know
Dynamic where both parties are afraid
that this would trigger nuclear meltdown
right and that means suicide and when
there was few parties exactly when there
was just nine people exactly you could
get all nine but in in when we're
talking about artificial technology
there's going to be more than nine
people right that have P access to the
full sort of power of that technology
for NE various reasons I don't think it
has to be like that I think that's the
challenge of containment
is to reduce the number of actors that
have access to the existential threat
Technologies to an absolute minimum and
then use the existing military and
economic incentives which have driven
World Order and peace so far um to to
prevent the proliferation of access to
these super intelligences or these agis
a quick word on hu as you know they're a
sponsor of this podcast and I'm an
investor in the company and I have to
say it's moments like this in my life
where I'm extreme busy and I'm flying
all over the place and I'm recording TV
shows and I'm recording shows in America
and here in the UK that hu is a
necessity in my life I'm someone that
regardless of external circumstances or
professional demands wants to stay
healthy and nutritionally complete and
that's exactly where heal fits in my
life it's enabled me to get all of the
vitamins and minerals and nutrients that
I need in my diet to be aligned with my
health goals while also not dropping the
ball on my professional goals because
it's convenient and because I can get it
online in Tesco in supermarkets all over
the country if you're one of those
people that hasn't yet tried hu or you
have before but for whatever reason
you're not a Hu consumer right now I
would highly recommend giving hu a go
and Tesco have now increased the
listings with hu so you can now get the
RTD ready to drink in Tesco expresses
all across the UK 10 areas of focus for
containment you're the first person I've
met that's really hazarded a laid out a
blueprint for the things that need to be
done
um cohesively to try and reach this
point of containment so I super excited
to talk to you about these the first one
is about safety and you mentioned there
that's kind of what we talked about a
little bit about there being AIS that
are currently being developed to help
contain other
AIS two
audits um which is being able to from
what I understand being able to audit
what's being built in the these open
source models three choke points what's
that yeah so choke point refers to
points in the supply chain where you can
throttle who has access to what okay so
on the internet today everyone thinks of
the internet as an idea this kind of
abstract Cloud thing that hovers around
above our heads but really the internet
is a bunch of cables those cables you
know are physical things that transmit
information you know under the sea and
you know the those points the end points
can be
stopped and you can monitor traffic you
can control basically what traffic moves
back and forth and then the second choke
point is access to chips so the gpus
graphics processing units which are used
to train these super large clusters I
mean we now have the second largest
supercomputer in the world today uh at
least you know just for this next six
months we will other people will catch
up soon but we're ahead of the curve
we're very luy
cost a billion dollars and those chips
are really the raw commodity that we use
to build these large language models and
access to those chips is something that
governments can should and are um you
know restricting that's a choke point
you spent a billion dollars on a
computer we did yeah it's bit more than
that actually about
1.3 a couple of years time that'll be
the price of an iPhone
that's the problem everyone's going to
have
it number six is quite curious you say
that um the need for governments to put
increased taxation on AI companies to be
able to find um fund the massive changes
in society such as paying for reskilling
and education yeah
um you put massive tax on over here I'm
going to go over
here if you tax it if I'm an AI company
and you're taxing me heavily over here
I'm going to Dubai yep or Portugal yep
so if it's that much of a competitive
disadvantage I will not build my company
where the taxation's high right
right so the way to think about this is
what are the strategies for containment
if we're agreed that long-term we want
to contain that is close down slow down
control both the proliferation of these
Technologies and the way the really big
AIS are used then the way to do that is
to tax things tax things taxing things
slows them down and that's what you're
looking for provided you can coordinate
internationally so you're totally right
that you know some people will move to
Singapore or to Abu Dhabi or Dubai or
whatever the reality is that at least
for the next you know sort of period I
would say 10 years or so the
concentrations of intellectual you know
horsepower will remain the big mega
cities right you know I I moved from
from London in 2020 to go to Silicon
Valley and I started my new company in
Silicon Valley because the concentration
of talent there is overwhelming all the
very best people are there on in in Ai
and software engineering so I think it's
quite likely that that's going to remain
the case for the foreseeable future but
in the long term you're totally right
how do you it's another coordination
problem how do we get nation states to
collectively agree that we want to try
and contain that we want to slow down
because
as we've discussed with the
proliferation of dangerous materials or
on the military side there's no use one
person doing it or one country doing it
if others race ahead and that's the
conundrum that we face I am I don't
consider myself to be a pessimist in my
life I consider myself to be an optimist
generally I think and I always I think
that as you've said I think we have no
choice but to be optimistic and I have
faith in humanity we've done so much so
many incredible things and so overcome
so many things and I also think I'm
really logical as in I'm the type of
person that needs evidence to change my
beliefs either way um when I look at all
of the whole picture having spoken to
you and several others on this subject
matter I see more reasons why we won't
be able to contain than reasons why we
will especially when I dig into those
incentives um you talk about incentives
at length in your book um at different
different points and it's clear that all
the incentives are pushing towards a
lack of containment especially in the
short and Midterm which tends to happen
with new technology in the short and
Midterm it's like a land grab the gold
is in the Stream we all rush to get the
the shovels and the you know the cves
and stuff and then we realize the
unintended consequences of that
hopefully not before it's too
late in chapter 8 you talk about
Unstoppable incentives at play here the
coming wave represents the greatest
economic prize in
history and scientists and technologists
are all too human they crave status
success and Legacy
and they want to be recognized as the
first and the best they're competitive
and clever with a carefully nurtured
sense of their place in the world and in
history
right I look at you I look at people
like Sam um from open AI
Elon you're all
humans with the same understanding of
your place in history and status and
success you all want that right
right there's a lot of people that maybe
aren't as don't have as good a track
record of you at doing the right thing
which you certainly have that will just
want the status and the success and the
money incredibly strong incentives I
always think about incentives as being
the thing that you look at when you want
to understand how people will behave all
of the incentives on a on a geopolitical
like on a global level suggest that
containment won't happen am I right in
that
assumption that all the incentives
suggest containment won't happen in the
short or midterm until there is a c a a
tragic event that makes us forces us
towards that idea of containment or if
there is a threat of mutually assured
destruction right so that and that's the
case that I'm trying to make is that
let's not wait for something
catastrophic to happen so it's
self-evident that we all have to work
towards containment right I mean you you
would have thought that the Potential
Threat the potential idea that
covid-19
was a side effect let's call it of a
laboratory in Wuhan that was exploring
gain of function research where it was
deliberately trying to basically make
the pathogen more transmissible you
would have thought that warning to all
of us let's let's not even debate
whether it was or wasn't but just the
fact that it's conceivable that it could
be that should really in my opinion have
forced all of us to instantly agree that
this kind of research should just be
shut down we should just not be doing
gain of function research on what planet
could we possibly persuade ourselves
that we can overcome the containment
problem in biology because we've proven
that we can't cuz it could have
potentially got out and there's a number
of other examples of where it did get
out of other diseases like foot and
mouth disease
mhm back in the '90s in the UK so but
that didn't change our Behavior right
well foot and mouth disease clearly
didn't cause enough harm because it only
killed a bunch of cattle right um and
the pandemic we can't seem you know
covid-19 pandemic we can't seem to agree
you know that it really was from a lab
and not from a bunch of bats right and
so that's where I struggle where you
know now you catch me in a moment where
I feel angry and sad and pessimistic
because to me that's like a
straightforwardly obvious conclusion
that you know this is a type of research
that we should be closing down and I
think we should be using these moments
to give us insight and wisdom about how
we handle other technology trajectories
in the next few decades should we should
we should that's what I'm advocating for
must that's the best I can do I want to
know will will I think be a
low I can only do my best I'm doing my
best to advocate for it I mean you know
like I'll give you an example like I
think autonomy is a type of AI
capability that we should not be
pursuing really like autonomous cars and
stuff well I I autonomous cars I think
are slightly different because
autonomous cars operate within a much
more constrained physical domain right
like you know you you really can the
containment strategies for autonomous
cars are quite reassuring right they
have you know GPS control you know we
know exactly all the Telemetry and how
exactly all of those you know components
on board a car operate and we can
observe repeatedly that it behaves
exactly as intended right whereas I
think with with other forms of autonomy
that people might be pursuing like
online okay you know where you have an
an AI that is like designed to
self-improve without any human oversight
or a battle Battlefield weapon which you
know like unlike a car hasn't been you
know over that particular moment in the
battlefield millions of times but is
actually facing a new enemy every time
you know every single time and we're
just going to go and you know allow
these autonomous weapons to have you
know the these autonomous military
robots to have lethal
Force I think that's something that we
should really resist I don't think we
want to have autonomous robots that have
lethal Force you're a super smart guy
and I I struggle to believe that you're
you you because you you demonstrate such
a clear understanding of the incentives
in your book that I struggle to believe
that you don't think the incentives will
win out especially in the short and near
term and then the problem is in the
short and near term as is the case with
most of these waves is we we wake up and
10 years time ago how the hell did we
get here right and why like and we and
as you say this precautionary approach
of we should have ranged the Bell
earlier we should have sounded the alarm
earlier but we waltzed in with optimism
right and with that kind of aversion to
confronting the realities of it and then
we woke up in 30 years and we're on a
leash right and there's a big rottweiler
and we're we've lost control we've lost
you know I
I I I would love to
know someone as smart as you I don't I
don't believe can be can believe that
containment is
possible and that's me just being
completely honest I'm not saying you're
lying to me but I just can't see how
someone as smart as you and in the know
as you can believe that containment is
going to happen well I didn't say it is
possible I said it must be right which
is this is what we keep discussing right
that's an important distinction is that
on the face of it look what I I care
about I care about science I care about
facts I care about describing the world
as I see it and what I've set out to do
in the book is des describe a set of
interlocking incentives which drive a
technology production process which
produces potentially really dangerous
outcomes and what I'm trying to do is
frame those outcomes in the context of
the containment problem and say this is
the big challenge of the 21st century
containment is the challenge and if it
isn't possible then we have serious
issues and on the face of it like I've
said in the book I mean the CH the first
chapter is called containment is not
possible right the last chapter is
called con must be possible for all our
sakes it must be possible but that but I
agree with you that I'm not I'm not
saying it is I'm saying this is what we
have to be working on we have no choice
we have no choice but to work on this
problem this is a critical
problem how much of your time are you
focusing on this problem basically all
my time I mean bu building and creating
is about understanding how these models
work what their limitations are how to
build it safely and ethically I mean we
have designed the structure of the
company to focus on the safety and
ethics aspects so for example we are a
public benefit Corporation right which
is a new type of corporation which gives
us a legal obligation to balance profit
making with the consequences of our
actions as a company on the rest of the
world the way that we affect the
environment you know the way that we
affect people the way that we affect
users that people who aren't users of
our products and that's a really
interesting I think and important New
Direction it's a new Evolution in
corporate structure because it says we
have a responsibility to proactively do
our best to do the right thing right and
I think that if if you were a tobacco
company back in the day or an oil
company back in the day and your legal
Charter said that your directors are
liable in if they don't meet the
criteria of stewarding your work in a
way that doesn't just optimize profit
which is what all companies are
incentivized to do at the moment talking
about incentives but actually in equal
measure attends to the importance of
doing good in the world to me that's a
incremental but important innovation in
how we organize society and how we
incentivize our work so it doesn't solve
everything it's it's it's not a Panacea
but that's my effort to try and take a
small step in the right direction do you
ever get sad about it about what's
happening yeah for sure for sure it's
intense it's intense it's a lot to take
in this is it's a it's a very
real
reality does that weigh on
you yeah it does I mean every day every
day I mean I've been working on this for
many years now and it's uh you know it's
it's
emotionally a lot to take in it's it's
it's hard to think about the far out
future and how your actions today our
actions collectively our weaknesses our
failures that you know that irritation
that I have that we can't learn the
lessons from the pandemic right like all
of those moments where you feel the
frustration governments not working
properly or corporations not listening
or some of the obsessions that we have
in culture where we're debating like
small things you know and you're just
like
Whoa We need to focus on the big picture
here you must feel a certain sense of
responsibility as well that most people
won't carry because you've spent so much
of your life at the very cutting edge of
this technology and you understand it
better than most you can speak to it
better than most so you have a a great
chance than many at
steering that's a
responsibility yeah I embrace that I try
to treat that as a
privilege I feel lucky to have
the opportunity to try and do that
there's this wonderful thing in my
favorite theatrical play called Hamilton
where he says history has its eyes on
you do you feel
that yeah I feel the I feel that I feel
that it's a good way of putting it I do
feel
that you're happy
right well what is happiness to
know um what's the range of emotions
that you you contend with on a on a
frequent basis if you're being
honest I think
is kind of exhausting and exhilarating
in equal measure because for me it is
beautiful to see people interact with
AIS and get huge benefit out of it I
mean you know every day now millions of
people have a super smart tool in their
pocket that is making them wiser and
healthier and happier providing
emotional support answering questions of
every type
making you more intelligent and so on
the face of it in the short term that
feels incredible it's amazing what we're
all
building but in the longer term it is
exhausting to keep making this argument
and you know have been doing it for a
long time and in a weird way I feel a
bit of a sense of relief in the last six
months because after chat gbt and you
know this this wave feels like it's
started to arrive and everybody gets it
so I feel like it's a shared problem
now and uh that feels nice it's not just
bouncing around in your head a little
bit it's not just in my head and a few
other people at Deep Mind and open Ai
and other places that have been talking
about it for a long
time ultimately human beings May no
longer be the primary planetary drivers
as we have become accustomed to being we
are going to live in an Epoch where the
majority of our daily interactions are
not with other people but with a eyes
page
284 of your
book The Last Page
[Laughter]
yeah think about how much of your day
you spend looking uh
screen 12 hours pretty much right
whether it's a phone or an iPad or a
desktop versus how much time you spend
looking into the eyes of your friends
and your loved
ones and so to me it's like we're
already there in a way you know what I
meant by that was you
know this is a world that we're kind of
already in you know the last three years
people have been talking about metaverse
metaverse metaverse and the
mischaracterization of the metaverse was
that it's over there it was this like
virtual world that we would all Bop
around in and talk to each other as
these little characters and but that was
totally wrong that was a complete
misframing the metaverse is already here
it's the digital space that exists in
parallel time to our everyday life it's
the conversation that you will have on
Twitter or you know the video that
you'll post on YouTube or this podcast
that will go out and connect with other
people it's that meta space of
interaction you know and I use meta to
mean Beyond this space not just that
weird other over there space that people
seem to point to and that's really what
is emerging here it's this parallel
digital space that is going to live
alongside with and in relation to our
physical world your kids come to you you
got kids no I don't have kids your
future kids if you ever have kids a
young child walks up to you and says
asks that question that Elon was asks
what should I do about with my future
what should I pursue in the light of
everything you know about how artificial
intelligence is going to change the
world and computational power and all of
these things what should I dedicate my
life to what do you say I would say
knowledge is power
Embrace understand grapple with the
consequences don't look the other way
when it feels
scary and do everything you can to
understand and part anticipate and shape
because it is
coming and if someone's listening to
this and they want to do something to
help this battle for which I think you
present as the solution
containment what can the individual
do read listen use the tools try to make
the
tools understand the current state of
Regulation see which organization are
organizing around it like you know
campaign groups activism groups you know
find solidarity connect with other
people spend time online ask these
questions mention it at the pub you know
ask your parents ask your mom how she's
reacting to you know talking to Alexa or
whatever it is that she might do pay
attention I think that's already enough
and there's no need to be more
prescriptive than that because I think
people are
creative and independent and will it
will it will be obvious to you what you
as an individual feel you need to
contribute In This Moment provided
you're paying
attention last question what if we fail
and what if we succeed what if we fail
in containment and what if we succeed in
containment of artificial
intelligence I honestly think that if we
succeed this is going to be the the most
productive and the most meritocratic
moment in the history of our species we
are about to make intelligence widely
available to hundreds of millions if not
billions of people and that is all going
to make us smarter and much more
creative and much more productive and I
think over the next few decades we will
solve many of our biggest Social
Challenges I really believe that I
really believe we're going to reduce the
cost of energy production storage and
distribution to zero marginal cost we're
going to reduce the cost of producing
healthy food and make that widely
available to everybody and I
think the same trajectory with healthc
care with Transportation with
education I think that ends up producing
radical abundance over a 30-year period
and in a world of radical abundance what
do I do with my day I think that's
another profound question and believe me
that is a good problem to have if we can
absolutely if do we don't need meaning
and purpose and oh man that is a better
problem to have than what we've just
been talking about for the last like 90
minutes yeah and I think that's
wonderful isn't that amazing I don't
know I I don't know the reason I I I'm
unsure is because everything that seems
wonderful has a has a unintended
consequence I'm sure it does we live in
a world of food abundance in the west
and our biggest problem is obesity right
so I'll take that problem in the grand
scheme of everything not need struggle
do we not need that kind of meaningful
voluntary struggle I think we'll create
new other you know opportunities to
Quest okay you know I I think that's an
easier problem to solve and I think it's
an amazing problem like many people
really don't want to work right they
they want to pursue their passion and
their Hobby and you know all the things
that you talk about and so on and
absolutely like we're now I think going
to be heading towards a world where we
can liberate people from the the Les of
work unless you really want to Universal
basic income I've long been an advocate
of Ubi very long time everyone gets a
check every month I don't think it's
going to quite take that form I actually
think it's going to be that we basically
reduce the cost of producing basic Goods
so that you're not as dependent on
income like imagine if you did have
basically free energy and food and you
you you could use that free energy to
grow your own food you could grow in a
desert because you would have adapted
seeds and so on you would have you know
desalination and so on that really
changes the structure of cities it
changes the structure of Nations it
means that you really can live in quite
different ways for very extended periods
without contact with the kind of Center
I mean I'm actually not a huge advocate
of that kind of libertarian you know wet
dream but like I think if you think
about it in theory it's kind of a really
interesting Dynamic that's what
proliferation of power means power isn't
just about access to intelligence it's
about access to these tools which allow
you to take control of your own destiny
and your life and create meaning and
purpose in the way that you you know
might Envision and that's incredibly
creative incredibly creative time that's
what success looks like to me
and well in some ways the downside of
that I think this that failure is not
achieving a world of radical abundance
in my opinion and and more more
importantly failure is a failure to
contain right what does that lead
to I think it leads to a mass
proliferation of power and people who
have really bad you know intentions what
does that lead to will potentially use
that power to cause harm to others this
is part of the challenge right a small
in this networked globalized World a
tiny group of people who wish to
deliberately cause harm
are going to have access to tools that
can instantly quickly have large scale
impact on many many other people and
that's the challenge of proliferation is
preventing those Bad actors from getting
access to the means to completely
destabilize um our world that's what
containment is
about we have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're leaving the question
for the question left for you is
what is a space or place that you
consider the most
sacred well I think one of the most
beautiful places I remember going to as
a child was um windir Lake in the Lake
District um and I was pretty young and
on a on a dingy with uh some family
members
and I just remember it being incredibly
Serene and beautiful and and calm I
actually haven't been back there since
but that was a pretty beautiful place
seems like the antithesis of the world
we live in right maybe I should go back
there and chill
out maybe thank you so much for writing
such a great book it's wonderful to to
to read a book on this subject matter
that does present Solutions because not
many of them do and it presents them in
a balanced way that appreciates both
sides of the argument doesn't isn't
tempted to just play to either what do
they call it playing to like the crowd
they call like playing to the orchestra
I can't remember right but just it
doesn't attempt to play to either side
or Ponder to either side in order to
score points it seems to be entirely
nuanced incredibly smart and Incredibly
necessary because of the stakes that the
book confronts um that are at play in
the world at the moment and and that's
really important it's very very very
important and it's important that I
think everybody reads this book it's
incredibly accessible as well and I said
to Jack who's the director of this
podcast before we started recording that
there's so many term there's so many
terms like
nanotechnology and um all the stuff
about like biotechnologies and Quantum
Computing that reading through the book
suddenly I understood what they meant
and these had been kind of exclusive ter
terms and Technologies and I also had
never understood the relationship that
all of these Technologies now have with
each other and how like robotics
emerging with artificial intelligence is
going to cause this whole new range of
possibilities that again have a good
side and a potential downside um It's a
Wonderful book and it's perfectly timed
it's perfectly timed wonderfully written
perfectly timed I'm so thankful that I
got to read it and I highly recommend
that anybody that's curious on this
subject matter goes and gets the book so
thank you Mustafa really really
appreciate your time and hopefully it
wasn't too uncomfortable for you thank
you this was awesome I loved it it was
really fun and uh thanks for such a
amazing amazing wide ranging
conversation thank
you if you've been listening to this
podcast over the last few months you'll
know that we're sponsored and supported
by Airbnb but it amazes me how many
people don't realize they could actually
be sitting on their very own Airbnb for
me as someone who works away a lot it
just makes sense to Airbnb my place at
home whilst I'm away if your job
requires you to be away from home for
extended periods of time why leave your
home empty you can so easily turn your
home into an Airbnb and let it generate
income for you whilst you're on the road
whether you could use a little extra
money to cover some bills or for
something a little bit more fun your
home might just be worth more than you
think and you can find out how much it's
worth at airbnb.co
/host that's
airbnb.co slost
[Music]
ah